Welcome to the Empirical Cycling Podcast. I'm your host, Cole Moore. Thank you, everybody, for listening. And if you are new here, please consider subscribing to the podcast if you like what you're hearing. And if you're not, thanks so much for coming back. Really appreciate it. And if you want to support the podcast because you like it so much and you're coming back a lot of time, you can always give us a nice podcast rating or wherever you listen to podcasts or review. Thanks so much for all of those. And sharing on the forums and with your friends, that is really one of the best things you can do for the podcast if you like it. So appreciate all of that kind of stuff.
has been doing that a lot, last couple months or years even. But we are an ad-free podcast, so if you do want to donate to the show, you can do so at empiricalcycling.com slash donate, and we thank, of course, our recurring donators, people giving us a regular monthly donation, super appreciate all of that, it really does help cover the hosting fees and the equipment and, you know, feeding me and Kyle burritos, so we've got energy.
for the podcast, and Kyle will be back in a couple weeks. So thanks for all of your patience. For everybody who misses him, everybody knows that I do too. So if you have any coaching or consultation inquiries, that is a really good way to support the podcast because we are a coaching company first and foremost, and we recognize that, of course, not everybody wants a coach, and that's why we don't...
Push it too hard on the podcast, obviously. But if you would like to discuss something with us, please reach out to me, empiricalcycling at gmail.com, or if you want to consult with me as well, or any of our coaches, just ask, and I've heard our rates are incredibly reasonable for that kind of stuff. So if you are wondering about reviewing a season, planning for next one, you're curious about tweaks for training, or event-specific stuff, you want to talk about strength training, or just about anything.
Just don't hesitate to reach out. Really happy to at least start a discussion, even if it ends up that you are happier elsewhere. That's totally fine with us. So if you have any questions or comments, please shoot me an email on all of that kind of stuff. And Instagram, if you would like to ask a question for any one of our guests or for any of our podcast topics, go follow me at Empirical Cycling. And we got a lot of good stuff for today's guest, and we'll talk about that in just a second.
We've got some show notes up on the website, contact info for our guest, who has been a client of mine on and off for the last couple years. He's a friend at this point, and he's a really good dude. He's been training and racing for an incredibly long time. Well, you'll hear more about that in just a second, but he is a professional domestic cyclist. He's the road captain for CS Velo. He's a...
is a really, really experienced bike racer. He's a really good dude, and he's always experimenting and tweaking with his training. And one of the things that I thought it would be cool to discuss with him back on the podcast is kind of how he's been doing this year, because it's been kind of a big year for him with his fitness. He's been riding more, and we discussed that. He's changed his nutrition, and we discussed that. He's gotten some really good results.
the team some really good results. He's also a coach, and we talk about coaching strategies and his approach there and how that's changed things. We talk about his race schedule and kind of maintaining fitness with a really, really busy race schedule. You're going to hear all about that in not too long now.
We kind of discuss RPE and why it's still relevant. And with your listener questions, we also discuss a lot of stuff on training, on racing, on the tone of the domestic race scene. Somebody asked about Legion, so we spent a little while on Legion and the reputation, whether it's deserved or not.
And we just have a really, really cool discussion, and unbelievably, it went on for about 45 minutes after we stopped recording, and I hit stop. And I really wish that we had actually continued recording, and I know not everybody is into a podcast of 90 minutes, let alone about two and a half hours, but it was a really cool discussion, and we kind of...
went deeper into some of the effects of the higher volume. And it was a lot of stuff like recovering faster and how that kind of helped him with his season throughout and just more in that vein. So I don't remember a lot of what we discussed, but it was a great conversation. And once again, I wish it had been on the podcast, but...
That's why we'll just have to have him on again. So without any further ado, this is a conversation I had with Taylor Warren of Source Endurance. That's it. All right. See everybody on the other side. Tell me about your year this year and the training, because this was a bit of a breakthrough year for you. A little bit so, especially since I've been racing since.
2009. Improvements are pretty hard to come by after even training for 13 plus years. So having, yeah, a couple PRs and sustained power as well as like shorter term power is pretty cool to see and that is a big motivator to continue to keep training at a pretty high level because honestly like that upward trajectory is what motivates me to keep going. You're always trying to find that.
The highest point of the limit, essentially. And knowing that I have potentially more headway to go is pretty encouraging. It's pretty cool. And I remember I had to convince you to ride more. But your life was also different last year compared to this year. So talk to me about the balance of life stress and training stress. Yeah, I mean, I'm a coach myself, and I always tell athletes you can only train for what you can recover from.
And, you know, time is not finite. Yeah, time is finite. So, riding big volume is not always in the cards, especially when you're balancing other life stressors. And sometimes it's just more stressful to add that extra hour or two than it is to, you know, do a shorter session and maybe go a little bit harder. So, a lot of that comes into play. But, yeah, finding that extra training time.
Especially at this point in my cycling, I think was a big boost, and focusing more on things that honestly should have taken me a much shorter time to learn was really important. Wait, like what? Like fueling for endurance riding. As opposed to, like what were you doing before?
I would fuel on endurance rides, but maybe 40 grams, 60 grams an hour. Maybe I'd start the ride with no food in my pockets at all, whether that was because I just didn't have any food at the house. So I'd ride intentionally knowing I was going to stop, but maybe I wouldn't stop until two, three hours into the ride. And that seemed to do me fairly well. I didn't really have any issues bonking or having catastrophic...
Biomechanicals, by any means. But this year, I made it a deliberate focus to try to push the upward limit of carbohydrates on almost every single session I did. That was a change from years past. And making that more of an objective on my endurance riding, I think, played a big role in seeing continued progress. So I was trying to get in 90 to 100, sometimes even more than 100 grams an hour.
What were the benefits that you were feeling? While you were riding and training, what in the real world were you like, wow, this is making a huge difference in XYZ? So what was XYZ? XYZ, I mean, the feeling was a big part of it, and then the intensity of those rides was a big part of it. And the way I describe it is not necessarily going to be life-changing for a single training session.
But it's really good at stacking itself on top of itself. So like building that forward momentum. So for instance, if you're pushing 100 grams an hour on an easy endurance ride, you're probably going to finish that ride with pretty high levels of glycogen storage. And that's going to put you at a great starting point for the following day. You're going to start your endurance ride and be fully topped off. And if you're feeling adequately on that ride as well, ideally, you're finishing that ride in a good spot.
Feeling energized and well-fed, and it transfers over into other aspects of your life, like maybe decreasing elevated levels of cortisol, so you're just happier throughout the day, feeling better, you're recovering better, and then this is going to carry over throughout a whole training block, not just a single session. I've really taken the approach of looking at training a little bit differently this year, where...
In hindsight, I put a lot of weight into single individual training sessions. And this year, I'm thinking it more about every training session is a drop in the water bucket. And it's much more beneficial to have that consistent drip than it is, you know, a big splash and then maybe not much drippage going on after that. So it's that consistency of fueling and just optimizing recovery on every single session. I think that made a really big difference.
But it didn't come without its own challenges. Because eating 100 grams an hour is a lot of food. Especially if you're doing, you know, if you're going to do like a 20, 25-hour week and you're trying to do that fueling strategy on every single hour of the week, that is a lot of food. It's a lot of carbohydrates. And so some of the issues I was running into were how do I make this economical? How do I prevent flavor fatigue?
How do I just get the calories in? Like, what is the best physical way to like? Well, so what was your solution? I actually started using a lot of calories in my bottles, using liquid calories. So I would, oftentimes I would ride with table sugar in my water bottles, sucrose. I mean, sucrose is, it's a one-to-one ratio, glucose to fructose. I would make my own lemonade.
More or less, I would take either fresh lemons, usually not fresh lemons, just like the bottle of lemon juice, and then I would measure out 100 grams of table sugar, and I would do maybe a pinch of sea salt, and basically make a homemade lemonade concoction, and it was delicious, first of all, which I think is really important. You want to be able to...
You want to want to eat the food you bring with you. It's really important, or else you're just not going to eat, or you're not going to eat as much. So dialing that in was super beneficial. And so I knew right away, and sometimes I would push the limits. I would do like 150 grams of carbs in those bottles. So I knew right away, like I'm guaranteed 200, 300 grams just from the liquid. And then usually once I'd finish those, I'd stop and just refill them with water. What did you do for sodium?
Sodium, I just used, I would use like two grams of sea salt, more or less. Oh, okay, so like kind of a lot, okay. I was thinking it was a sprinkle, but okay, yeah, this is quite a bit. No, I was doing quite a bit, because I was really trying to balance out the sweetness of 150 grams of table sugar in a water bottle, and I found that, you know, putting a little bit more sodium, which I think had other benefits, especially I was training a lot in.
Boise, Idaho, where it was consistently 9,500 degrees. So high sodium content was pretty beneficial. And then I think a lot of the citric acid in the lemon juice really helped to cut the sweetness of the sugar. So it was pretty palatable. And I mean, everyone's going to have different preferences and different solutions to problems, but that tended to work really well for me. I know some people might have gut issues with straight table sugar, but it seemed.
seemed fine for me, and I enjoyed the taste, and yeah. The concentration is really high with that. And I've always been able to tolerate that kind of thing, personally. Like, I'll take Scratch and I'll add a ton of extra sodium, a lot of like sodium citrate to it, and that's totally fine for me. Although I know a lot of folks where that works very badly. Like, the same concentration of Gatorade.
does horrible things to my gut on a ride. But yeah, the scratch and the sodium just seems to be totally fine. So yeah, it's one of those individual things. Right. Yeah, and I was trying to cut it a little bit. Like if I'd start with two liter-sized bottles, so it's quite a bit of liquid in there. And then I would usually drink one and fill it up with straight water. And then my second bottle would just be straight water before continuing to the other bottle full of the sugar.
Um, actually, let me ask you one question about your endurance rides, because when you're doing endurance rides, um, because, uh, I, I think, you know, uh, a pro cyclist in the podcast, people are probably going, oh, he's got like some 480 watt FTP or whatever, um, and he's doing 300 watts in his endurance rides. So, like, what, how many watts are you doing, uh, just to give, uh, regular folks kind of an idea of, uh,
You know, the benefits of 100 grams an hour for an easy endurance ride. Right. Yeah. I mean, my power would typically range from 180 to 220 on average. More, yeah, 200 more or less, which, you know, comes out to be maybe 60% of FTP or somewhere in that realm. And so the intensity wasn't really that high, but carbohydrates was pretty high relative to that. And, I mean, you're still burning a lot of kilojoules.
Even quite a low intensity, right? Especially if you're six hours on the bike and probably not eating lunch on that ride as well. Yeah, absolutely. I mean, and just looking at the data, your fitness was just trending up real steady the entire year. It's really good to see because a lot of the times folks seem to hit a plateau or even start to fade when they've got a really busy season like yours. So talk to me a little bit about
balancing the training and the racing. Because I think there's a lot of people even who do a ton of local races where this is a problem where they are racing a lot and they need to do some training and they're not quite doing the training. The fitness starts to fall off, but they got to do the racing, something like that. So I bet that sounds relatable to a lot of folks. Yeah, for sure. That was honestly a really big challenge this year. Especially, I think I did every single race on our team calendar this year, which was...
Quite a bit, quite a bit more than I've done in the last couple years past, just with the pandemic, racing, the number of races fell off quite a bit, so schedule's been pretty light, and then this year I kind of jumped in, I think I was doing maybe, I did 50 plus races this year, so quite a big haul, and yeah, exactly what you're talking about, I mean, a lot of the fitness gains I needed to make needed to happen between December and
and March, more or less. And then once you hit, for me, the first big race of the year is Redlands. And it was like, once I hit Redlands, I didn't really train until like July. So I decided Redlands like the beginning of April. And then I was racing so much or traveling for racing or just dealing with life stress. I would maybe do like the odd interval session once in a while, but more or less, I was more focused on just recovery and getting to the next race. And so like most of the spring, I was just banking on,
the fitness I built through the off-season and just maintaining and recovering. And then fortunately, my schedule permitted me to have a mid-season break, which I would recommend to just about everyone out there. Taking a week off in the middle of summer is really important. And so I took this week off. I think I rode, I still rode a little bit. I rode maybe like five or so hours. And a lot of that was easy mountain bike riding, solar riding, if you will. And then I...
I kind of went back to doing an aerobic, like a volume build more or less. You only compressed your early season training into like two or three weeks. Right. I compressed it into six weeks. So I maybe took 16 weeks and compressed it into a six-week block. And I kept it really, really simple. Like I had the six-week block and my primary goal was I'm going to ride 20 plus hours every single week for the next six weeks.
the main objective of the training block. And then if I was able to sprinkle in intensity here and there, that was a nice bonus. But I think in that whole block, I might have done, I think I did like three races and maybe another four or five days of intensity on top of that. So yeah, you're looking at eight days of intensity for six weeks. I want to rewind for a second back to you talking about maintenance sessions in season and recovering.
I think this is something that a lot of people want to hear because this is one of the things that I get questions on the most. Besides, you know, besides a couple of things, managing fatigue and training and race season is a really big one. So what signals did you use to know that you were tired? And what training sessions did you use when you know you needed to turn the legs over a little bit hard?
Oh, well, I didn't really need any signals to know I was tired. I kind of just knew I was tired. You know, you do a five-day stage race like Redlands and you finish that race and I went straight to Gila from Redlands. I'm at 10 days of altitude and then I do Gila and then I come home and I'm home for like a week or two and I'm back on the road doing Joe Martin or whatever else is next. I try to periodize things as much as possible, so.
A lot of times when I would have maybe two weeks between races, I would get in the odd threshold session, just to try to maintain that, because I didn't really feel the need to do any high intensity, because I'm racing so much, you don't need to do VO2 max, you don't need to do any anaerobic capacity work, you're getting so much of that in racing already, so main priority was recovery, recovering from the racing, recovering from the travel, recovering from
the life stress I would deal with, because I'd have to catch up on life essentially, even on the road traveling, you get home and there's things to do, so balancing that as well. And then giving myself maybe 48 hours after each race and reassessing, and I would ride mostly just volume, easy volume in between, just to maintain that, because you want to maintain a decent level of aerobic fitness. And then on days when I felt my legs could push, I would just...
Look for maybe sweet spot or threshold type sessions and try to maintain that to some degree because that's a little bit more specific outside of racing. I would say it's easy to get a lot of VO2 work in races, but you're not necessarily getting dedicated.
Threshold Blocks, unless you're doing, you know, like a bunch of mountaintop finishes, where you're just finishing every race, like doing an hour of sweet spot or whatever, which I was not doing. Yeah, and actually one of the funny things I remember, one of the very first consultations I ever did in like 2016 or something like that, this dude I was consulting with, his fitness like grew over the entire season, and he was at his fittest in late September.
and he was like, how do I do this in May and June? Because that's one of those things where I was looking at where is he getting the intensity and he wasn't, he was doing like really short intervals, like one minute sprints and threshold stuff and endurance riding and he was totally missing VO2s like for his regular training and I said, oh, well.
The racing is giving you that VO2 stimulus, and so you are accumulating it gradually over the year and recovering. But yeah, it's one of those things where, like you saw, if you do want to build that fitness, you have to do it before the season gets started, or you are going to be a late bloomer. Right. Yeah, and I use the expression a lot of maintaining is relatively easy, whereas building is quite hard. Yeah. So you can maintain to a certain degree throughout the season, or you might see...
Small declines in fitness level with excessive racing, but racing is pretty good at maintaining fitness quite a long time. Very, very true. I actually do know a couple of people who feel like their threshold falls off if they're not touching on it a little bit. But yeah, other than that, some people really don't even need it. But by the way, you did a ton of race days. You did 38 race days according to road results.
But I'm going to pull that down to 36 because there are two GC results in here. But a lot of that was between March and June, like most of it. And then it was pretty much Salt Lake and GMSR and like Bucks and New Haven from between July and like now. Exactly. Yeah, I think not even all the races I did were on road results either.
That is the American calendar. It's so front-loaded. It's pretty ridiculous, especially if you're primarily a stage racer. There's three big stage races in the country, and they all happen between April and May. So there's a period of time where I probably did, I think between Jeredlin, Gila, Joe Martin, you end up doing 14 race days.
in a span of like 25 days or something. Did you hear the rumor that Joe Martin might get pushed into late summer or fall? I heard that rumor, but I also have seen the 2024 ECI calendar and it's in Joe Martin's in May. According to that, it's like May 28th to June 2nd or whatever. So I don't know how accurate those rumors are. Yeah, who knows? I also keep hearing rumors about where Pronats is going to be next year. And where have you heard?
I've heard Ben, Oregon. I've heard Roanoke, Virginia. Those are the two that I've heard maybe multiple times. Those are the two I've heard too. Roanoke would be nice. I'm pretty close. I do not want to fly all the way to Ben. I would be interested to see what kind of course they use because I'm sure they would use a much more challenging course than they did for the amateur elite road race. But I'm sure they could find
You know, just probably some nasty climbs in the area. I have no doubt. Well, why don't we talk about... Let's stick on training for a little bit still. You know, because one of the things that we kind of discussed about touching on was RPE and why it's so relevant in a very data-heavy world. So tell me about...
RPE, and also I may or may not be able to take most of the credit for bringing it up as a thing way back in my How Do You Pace Zone 2 rides or whatever episode that was. Right. Yeah, and I definitely worked more with you on RPE than I have in the past. I think I started using RPE a lot when I first started riding and racing just because I was
16 years old and had a heart rate monitor. That's all you had. I didn't have a power meter or anything. You just ride, you know, okay, go do intervals as hard as you can, kind of concept. But I think the more I race and coach, the more I come back to RPE. And the more you realize that heart rate and power are, they're objective quantifiers of something that's subjective, which is RPE. And that's how I've been.
really trying to look at it lately. So it's like, why am I training these things that are kind of a roundabout way of the other thing I'm training, when I could just train that concept in the first place? And so I think RPE, it's putting you more in touch with your physiology, and training is about training your physiology, not training a power number or a heart rate. These are tools to guide you towards the physiology you're looking to train.
But I think the human body is very good at finding its limits without extra tools to measure these things with. Like, you already have the tools built in. Are you breathing really, really hard? Do you feel like you're suffering quite a bit? Oh, you're probably at like a 10 out of 10 RPE. You don't need the heart rate or power meter to necessarily tell you these things. And I think a lot of people get...
I think it's an ego thing really too with the endurance riding. You get caught up in these ego watts where the RPE really knocks that down and it's not as big of a factor and you can actually relinquish that and really delve into how really does this feel instead of I need to stare at my power meter and ride 200 watts for the six hour ride and if I deviate I'm going to get a shit training session or whatever. How many people do you know?
whose FTP is between 250 and about 350 watts, who say they have to ride at 200 watts for their endurance rides. Right. Yeah, it's probably the majority of the people that I start working with. Yeah, and it's always 200 watts. It's a nice round number, and it's like, oh, 200 watts. Yeah, I can do 200 watts for three hours. All right.
The human brain loves round numbers. Apparently. My favorite round number when I was riding a lot was 180. Most of my rides ended up averaging about 180. And I really enjoyed that. I enjoyed the consistency. I enjoyed that I wasn't dead after my rides unless I was out with Dan and Will and them and they put me through my paces just with their riding easy. So that was always fun. I ended up doing this.
Backpacking, backpacking trip a couple weeks ago. I was riding some really long days. I did, what did I do? Is that where your 30-hour week popped up? Yeah, exactly. I ended up doing 30 hours for the week, but I did two back-to-back days. One was 140 miles, and the next day was 180 miles. So it ended up being maybe an eight-hour and some change day, followed by a 10-hour and change day.
And so these rides really forced me to think about RPE and my strategy for these long rides was I'm going to ride as fast as I can that still feels easy. And the power ended up being almost identical both days, which I thought was kind of funny. I averaged 185 watts both days. So that gave me a lot of insight on...
What is the fastest sustainable pace that still feels really easy? And I think that really helped me gauge kind of where that lower bottom end of what's appropriate for riding an endurance pace at, where it's like, yeah, you're still getting work in, but it should feel quite easy, maybe suspiciously too easy. Like you could ride 10 hours easy at this pace. And I think there's actually a big benefit to that. And I think you're still going to get a lot of
Fitness out of riding at that intensity. Yeah, especially if you are doing 30-hour weeks and 10-hour rides. But even without that, the benefits are so huge. In the last two, three weeks, I got at least three DMs from people saying, I started riding my endurance rides a lot easier. And that's the keyword you said, it's really easy.
It has to be suspiciously easy. And they said that all of their other training got so much better. Like, they had a lot more power and a lot more energy for the hard days than they ever did before, and their fitness was really starting to improve finally. Right. Yeah, I think the best way to describe it is if you're going to get the same adaptation from riding 180 watts as you are from 220 watts for endurance rides, which, I mean, most of the research is showing that is probably the case.
The 220 watt average ride is just going to, you're just going to burn a lot more kilojoules and you're going to be more tired at the end of it, but you're not necessarily going to be any fitter. And so it goes back to that concept of looking at training and periods of time and blocks and like in week-long intervals and month-long intervals, not in a single session. Like riding 220 watts for a single endurance ride, it's...
Probably fine. You're not going to explode or anything. You might feel strong at the end of that ride or not be in too big of a hole the next day. But if you do that 30 days in a row for your endurance block, you're going to be fried by the end of it. You're going to be such in a caloric deficit. You're going to have elevated cortisol levels and adrenal fatigue and symptoms of overtraining without anything to show for it necessarily.
Whereas if you did that whole month at 185 watts, your adaptations acquired would probably be very similar, but you would probably be in a good mood all the time and probably still enjoy riding your bike. And I think there's a lot to be said for having fun with the training. Burnout is a big thing for sure.
So preventing burnout, especially mental burnout, is very important for that consistency of training. How did you avoid mental burnout with the ridiculous spring calendar you did of doing every single race that C.S. Vela did? I love bike racing. And I think I was doing a pretty good job of recovering from the races and the travel. I'm pretty good at spending life on the road at this point.
The stress of travel really piles on, whereas for me, I mean, I travel quite a bit, even in the off-season, so it's kind of just part of my daily life, so I think, obviously, I'm getting stressed by the racing, but I'm maybe handling the travel stress a little bit better, so I think that is really important, and I really do enjoy racing, and I enjoy the team I race for, and I was riding well, and we were doing well as a team. We won Team GC at Gila, which was a big motivator, had some good
finishes in some stages at Redlands and Gila. Joe Martin was a little bit rough, but we bounced back and we ended up podiuming every single day at the Amateur Nationals with Alma winning the road race. I finished fifth in the crit and I had two teammates, second and fourth in the TT. So I think it really helps motivation levels when you're doing well also. Yeah. Oh, you know what I just noticed is on road results, Joe Martin's not in here.
So, you probably did over 40 race days. No, I'm telling you, it was like 50, because I did, I did track, like, I count the track racing I did as well. Oh, yeah, that's right. And then I did some other local stuff I don't think was on road results, and yeah, Joe Martin's not on there, and there's a couple other ones. I think I had probably close to 50 plus race days this year. That would kill most people. Yeah, I mean.
It's not common these days to get in that many races, but I remember I started racing in 2009, and it was a Cat 1 by 2013, 2014, and I think a big part of it was just the availability of racing, but the early years I was racing, I think I was doing 60 plus races, but a lot of those were local, and it's a lot easier to do.
a big local calendar than to do a ton of travel calendars. Like, I don't think the racing is what really burns people out more often than not. I think it's the travel. The travel gets really tiring and just not being at home in your own environment, having your own space becomes really draining. And especially if the team logistics are weak, the travel can add exponentially larger levels of stress to somebody. Like one of my...
One of my clients was in Europe for most of the year, and one of the problems that they were having was getting in late, nobody had planned food or anything like that. The lodgings were up in the air sometimes, travel from the airport to lodgings, travel to races, people don't get a chance to warm up for a TT or anything like that. And all these issues, they compound so much. So what have you learned?
that made your ability to travel so much better. Do you have a checklist? Do you have just everything goes in the same place? Like you've got your suitcase and when you're done using this thing, it goes right back in because that's how I would do it. Right. I haven't ever thought about it too formally. I think it just comes with a lot of... How many things have you left behind? Well, I definitely, yeah, have definitely left a lot of things behind. But I think it just comes with an experience. And if you're traveling...
Yeah, every two weeks, right? You're going to get pretty good at it, or you're going to burn out, right? Or you're going to get really tired. I try to pack really light. I try to keep it really simple. I try to make sure I can get on, like, the time zone appropriate for the area I'm in. So I think that's really important to think about circadian rhythm to some degree and trying to normalize the travel as much as possible so it feels more homely. So getting...
Getting to your accommodation, and ideally, like you were saying, ideally the logistics are pretty sound. I've been pretty fortunate on CS Fellow to have a lot of support from the staff, and usually our accommodations are really good, and the food situation is taken care of and really good, but that's not always the case. I remember one year at Gila, I was sleeping in an abandoned Verizon wireless building for the host housing.
We were all sleeping on air mattresses in this abandoned building in the middle of Silver City. I was showering with a hose in the back of the building. We're cooking all our meals in crockpots. It was amazing and horrible at the same time. And I bet you had no cell service at the Verizon building. You're right, yeah, because there's no one there anymore. So I've had...
I've had bad experiences with accommodations and logistics, and I've been pretty fortunate this year to have, like, really good experiences. And obviously setting up a sound sleep area is really important. So just making sure you're getting as high of quality sleep on the road as you get at home is really important. So some of the tricks I use for that are bringing an eye mask, potentially bringing in your own pillow or something that feels familiar. I think it's important to sync up with the circadian rhythm.
of your body, like in that time zone. So if you're traveling from West Coast to East Coast, when you land on the East Coast, just pretend like this is home now, like I need to go to bed with the sunset and get up with the sunrise, essentially not stare at too much blue light after sundown and try to get on East Coast meal schedule and not pretend like you're still in your time zone back home. So little trips
Tricks and Tips like that, where you're just trying to normalize as much as possible to your familiar surroundings. I have a question on that, which is, would you rather do the get up super early in the morning or go to bed super late to do the adjustment? Like, where would you rather lose to sleep? I'd rather get up super early in the morning to do the adjustment. I think sleep quality suffers a lot more when you're...
getting to bed at a later hour than you otherwise would. But when you're able to get to bed at a somewhat normal hour, you get a lot of deep sleep in the beginning of that cycle. And then having to wake up prematurely, I don't think has as bad of implications. But I think it also comes back to the individual where I'm a morning person in general. So that's not as challenging for me. You just cannot be trusted, can you? Right. So if someone's a morning person, I would suggest that strategy. If someone is...
You know, maybe they prefer going to bed late and getting up late. It could be beneficial for them to do the reverse. Yeah, that's me. As soon as I didn't have to get up to go to work anymore in the morning, I was like, oh, look, it's midnight. I should probably go to bed kind of person. Yeah. Yeah, I really try to go to bed with the sunset.
Get up at the sunrise. Is that sucking the winter because you're in bed for like 14 hours? I mean, I'm not going to bed that soon after the sunset, but like in general, you know, like trying to get to bed 9.30, 10 p.m. and waking up a little bit fast for a slight. That's smart. Oh, actually, I have a question for you because I've never looked this deep into your road results history, but you raced for CSU.
for a little bit. Yes, I did. I went to school at Colorado State in 2011 to 2014. How did you like collegiate cycling? I love collegiate cycling. I think collegiate cycling in the U.S. is really important because it kind of bridges the gap between juniors and elites. If you go to Belgium, if you go to Italy, you can jump into U23 race almost every single weekend if you're that age.
In the U.S., it's pretty much non-existent. You have U23 Nationals, and that's about it. So I think that is a barrier for athletes trying to make the jump to maybe the elite level or just continue in the sport in general. So I think collegiate cycling really helps to bridge that gap. And it's not just for high-level elites. It's a great landing spot for people of all cycling backgrounds to get into the sport, from novices to professionals.
I think having the camaraderie of high-level riders with novices and everyone racing on the same team is mutually beneficial. I think it's a great place to learn how to race, and it's a really fun environment. You're racing with your peers, people the same age as you. Typically, I would find the courses for collegiate racing were some of the best of the whole season, especially out in Colorado. A lot of times, the more dynamic courses were the collegiate races I was doing.
And that was a club program, right? Yeah, CSU is a club program, but we would consistently finish maybe top five in the country. Just, yeah, a lot of influx of talent in the RMCCC. Yeah, one of the things that I talk about with a lot of young bike racers is that you don't actually have to go to a varsity program to get into a very good cycling school. I mean, varsity programs will...
typically, or can sometimes give you scholarship money, but not always, and a lot of the time you get a, well, a lot of varsity schools are going to hate me for saying this, you can get a better education going to a club program, like, and some of the club programs, because I'm from up in the ECCC, and UVM and MIT have some of the absolute best club programs in the whole country, and what was it, AU, or
UA, whatever one Joey's at, that is a great program too. And you can get everything that you could possibly want out of those things. And there are so many pros currently, like Sepp Coos also. I was racing against Sepp when he was at CU Boulder. Yeah, I agree with that. I don't think a varsity program was necessary.
That was one of the factors I was considering with choosing Colorado State, was they had a really good balance of education and a cycling program. Like, they were consistently ranked, like, top five in the country, but had a good exercise science program. And CEU Boulder is the same way, where they're not a varsity program either, but you're EC-consistent pros coming out of that program, and guys like Sep Kuse coming out of there. Yeah, I've coached...
couple people from CU Boulder, and they are quite fast. Right. Yeah, you know one of them, actually. But anyway, so why don't we move on a little bit, because you have been racing for a long time, looking at your deep history here. So, because you started at the tail end of the Lance boom, and so did I. I didn't get into it from...
Lance, actually, I've never asked you, what got you into competitive cycling? It was my family, my dad and his brother are really into it. Really? And I kind of cycled through just about every other sport as a teenager, played a lot of team sports, and then I started cycling for cross-training, actually, and I started riding a little bit with my dad, and found I was quite good at it, enjoyed it quite a bit, so that was actually the sport that ended up sticking.
Cool. Alright, so you've been there for a long time, and you were a Cat 1 fairly quickly. How has the landscape of racing in the U.S. changed since the end of the boom years? Yeah, so I've been a Cat 1 since 2014, so I did my first Redlands in 2014. I think the biggest shift I've seen is just the amount of racing and opportunity to race available.
I think when I did that first Redlands, there was probably 15 domestic pro teams in that race. And I would say most of the riders on those teams were making a livable salary. Hold on. I got to interrupt you for a second because I just went to the stage one. You came in 115th out of 201 riders. Yeah. Yeah. Redlands is...
I think their max limit for the field size is like 214 riders. Oh my God. Yeah. I was like, my goals for that race were like, all right, I just want to finish in the top half, which is like 100th place. Yeah. But I can imagine on something like Highlands, like the front of the field can see the back of the field with a 200 person. Well, not that everybody made it to the end, but that is just about. Yeah. Yeah. Wow. Yeah. Sorry. I didn't mean to interrupt. I was just.
That is a huge field size compared to today. Yeah, I'm seeing the field sizes are getting bigger. Like this year, I think levels were bigger since perhaps the pre-pandemic. I've heard things from USA Cycling as well where racer participation is as high as it was in like 2018. So it's rebounded beyond levels even before the pandemic, which I think is a really good sign. I'm seeing a lot of...
More momentum in cycling these days than I have in the last three to four years. But yeah, that was probably the biggest change to see over the years is having 15 domestic pro teams and maybe three or four pro continental teams and just having tons of pros and people making more of a livable wage to seeing these days, I think, you know, there's maybe three domestic pro teams and not many people are getting
Paid to Ride Their Bike. But it's interesting because I don't think that has impacted the level of competition really at all. And if anything, I would say the racing is faster these days. And I think that's because of two reasons. I think one is equipment is better. Bikes are lighter, more aerodynamic. Disc brakes are definitely beneficial. And I think the other thing is riders are smarter about how they're training for the most part.
I think there's more resources out there, and the sports science has improved a little bit. Because I was looking on Strava this year, and at Redlands this year, we actually set the KOM for the Sunset, 12 laps on Sunset Loop. So, in theory, that race was faster than it's ever been since the invention of Strava. That is an important asterisk. Yeah, I think Strava was popularized.
2010 or 2009 or whatever. So it hasn't been around forever, but I would bet that this year's Sunset Race was the fastest in history of Redlands. And so your role on CS Velo is road captain. And so you have to be acutely aware of kind of the vibe of the Peloton at all times, right?
Right. So has that changed at all in racing? Are things more aggressive? Are things less aggressive? Are things more strategic? Do people fall off the back later because they're training better? So how do you key into the vibe and what's it like and has it changed? That's a pretty interesting question. I mean, to be able to key into the vibe, first of all, I have to be fit enough to be towards the front to see what's going on.
And then I think teams are more strategic these days. I think a lot of times teams are putting together more of a unified effort. And you can see it in the World Tour for sure, how that's changed over the years. And I think that's been reflected in domestic racing as well, where teams are willing to use all their riders for a single purpose and really push resources into a unified plan.
where, I mean, maybe racing five plus years ago is a little more chaotic and you might have seen more of like a strong man's game, like the best guys is going to come out on top after like, there's just a bunch of attacks and counters and the five strongest dudes in the race go up the road and that's kind of the race where I think people are strategizing and thinking about the tactics of racing a little bit more these days. I mean, and you...
on CSFLA definitely did that, because you, Sean Gardner, won Redlands last year, and Sean Gardner won Gila. Oh, Gila, sorry. And did you have any big GC victories this year? I forgot. We ended up winning the Green Mountain Stage Race. Oh, yeah. That, of course, is right up there with Redlands and Gila. It's, yeah, I mean, it's definitely a step below, but it's a pretty big race, and it's done right, and it's got hard competition for sure.
So, what about in crits? Because this is something, because we've got a billion listener questions, so I want to move on to those, because I want to get to most of them, because most of them are pretty good. But I wanted to ask about crits and aggression. So, has it gotten more aggressive? Is it safer? Is it less safe? Have disc brakes helped? Have wider tires helped? Where are you now, as opposed to 10 years ago?
I don't know if really anything's changed too much on the safety front. I think equipment has potentially made racing a little safer. I think disc brakes, you have a lot more leeway as far as braking power goes. And I think I'm able to get myself out of potentially dangerous situations a little bit easier with disc brakes. Wider tires have been super nice. I think...
My opinion on tires, I think 28mm tires are skinny these days, whereas, where like, you know, that was kind of unheard of five years ago. So most of the year I've raced on 28s at 55 to 60 PSI. It's quite low. But so those factors aside, I mean, racing is inherently dangerous. You're riding a bike at 30 miles an hour. There's just no way around people overlapping wheels, people crashing in front of you.
I don't think safety as far as the race dynamic has necessarily changed too much. That's interesting because one of the first questions that somebody asks is, what do you think of Legion and Curbs? So why don't we just phrase it in a nice way? Thanks, John. Let me think about how to phrase this.
Do you think Legion's reputation for aggression is overstated? I think it's somewhat overstated. I think that's not to say that the aggression isn't there. And I think to control the front of a race, aggression is almost required because people are constantly trying to overtake you. And Legion is very, very good at what they do. I do think the aggression is a little bit overstated. I think a lot of the media that's put out,
really sheds Legion in a pretty negative light. That's not to say that they're not... So they're not baseless claims. They're not baseless, but they're definitely overstated. Because we were talking a little bit before we hit record about one of my clients who was told, you can't ride next to us or we are actually going to put you in a curb. And he had words with them afterwards and they did not take kindly to his words.
But, you know, that's just some, that's just what I heard. And I was like, oh, yeah, who knows. Then I saw a video of it, and I went, oh, that's pretty blatant. Because you were there in the UHC days, right? Like, UHC would let you ride next to them, but you couldn't be in their train. So, you know, how's that different with Legion? Like, if you've got a train that can compete, are you allowed to actually ride next to them?
I would say the hardest part about riding next to Legion Train is just having the firepower to be able to do so. Because they're really strong. Right. They have some really good riders that set 30 mile an hour pace for hour-long crit. So, yeah, being a big part of riding next to them is having the firepower to do so. You need to take four or five of the strongest guys in the race to be able to do that, essentially.
And the way Legion rides is they're really good at controlling the inside of the course. So the way they ride is they'll stack their line on the inside of the course and stagger their riders as the train goes up. You mean like an echelon? Essentially, yeah. And then coming into the turn, they'll push wide in a pretty unified way and then come through the turn single file and on the apex of the inside of the turn. And what this does essentially is it's blocking...
It's blocking riders from forward movement. Yeah, you can't undercut when they take the apex. Right. So, it's almost not even possible to ride next to their train on a lot of the crit courses. You almost really need to overtake the train and ride the race line to really be impactful. Because if you ride next to the train...
You could potentially push them wide and take that inside line, but you're basically going to be fighting the train the whole time for optimal lines in the corners, and that's going to be really challenging. And dangerous, I would assume. Exactly. All right, so let's get back into the regular stuff. I just had to get our obvious one out of the way. What power durations are most important to test and train for in the U.S. racing scene? Oh, I mean...
I'd say five minute power is pretty important. US racing, you're not going to find a whole lot of super sustained efforts, not a lot of like mountaintop finishes. A lot of races tend to come down to like raw VO2 power, it seems like. So having really good five minute power, I'd say is beneficial, maybe keeping tabs on that throughout the year.
Just the normal stuff, maybe. Everything. Yeah, a 30-minute effort to get a ballpark of FTP, probably pretty important. If you're an anaerobic rider, maybe test your... That's just Brent, one minute. Test your 10-second, 20-second power, test your one minute. Yeah, I think 20-second power is a little bit underrated, where a lot of people, they're looking for the max. They're like, what can I hit for my peak power? And honestly...
In my experience, max power doesn't even matter that much. What matters is, can you do 1,000 plus watts for 20 seconds? That's going to be way more important for finishing well in races. Yeah, because you're not going to come around from somebody with 30 meters left in the race, like three seconds, okay, 2,500 watts, wee! Yeah, you're literally never going to hit your max in a race, unless everyone comes to a track stand stop and you're just popping up the hardest effort you can. But yeah, you're basically doing a series of
Short sprints to fight for position, and then you're doing a super threshold effort, and then you're sprinting really hard off that. So max sprint power is going to be quite diminished. I think 20 second to one minute power is probably more beneficial for race results than like a max five second. I agree because it's almost like a one minute ramp into your sprint. Right. It's like the final in a bunch sprint.
Alright, here's an interesting question. Could someone effectively train for a wide variety of races, like a 6 plus hour gravel, 60 minute crits, and in between? Is it possible to train for everything at once, I guess, is what they're asking. I mean, that's basically what I do. My philosophy is, like, if I'm fit and strong for a 6 hour gravel race, I'm going to be just fine for a 60 minute crit. You know, because, I mean, there really is a lot.
I think there's a lot more similarities in road racing and crit racing than people actually realize. As far as fitness goes, right, I think there definitely is a lot of differentiating factors. I think for career racing, like, people shouldn't necessarily think about, okay, I need different physiology for crit racing versus road racing. I think it's more, what skills do I need for each of these races and how is that going to affect fitness?
In general, this isn't always the case. I think maybe spring classics are an outlier, but road racing is going to be less skill-oriented and maybe a little bit more fitness-oriented, whereas crit racing skews the other direction. It's going to be much more skill-oriented and maybe a little bit less fitness-oriented, course-dependent. And I think that is really overlooked by racers, where everyone's just worried about their sprint power, their FTP.
People don't necessarily think about their skill set and how that's going to impact what races are going to go well for them or what they need to work on. Because there's definitely a ton of athletes out there that working on skill sets would be much more beneficial than trying to push their FTP up another 5 or 10 watts. Because the number of people I know and you know who have an FTP around the 300-watt mark who can still top 10 or podium in an ACC race,
I'm always shocked and impressed by how well they can race with that few watts. And it just goes to show, if you are smart and you use your power wisely and your energy wisely, yeah, you absolutely can. I usually think, you know, you could probably work on both. But yeah, I agree. Actually, I was going to ask you also, and this is a me question, this is not somebody asking.
Train and Raced for as long as you have. Do you think that gives you any benefits versus somebody who has been training and racing for, let's say, two years? Because one of the things, and here's the reason I ask this, one of the things I find is that people who have raced for a long time have a...
Much easier time doing the repeated accelerations. That fitness is basically ingrained and they don't have to do any until they go race and then they're fine. So how do you think that's affected you? Because I know you coach some folks who are less trained than you are. So where do you think the difference is there? That's interesting. I've never actually thought about that. And it's hard to say for sure because I think
My physiology, I'm naturally good at those short, repeated accelerations. It might actually be more of a neuromuscular thing, where I'm just much more neuromuscular trained from years of racing, where my muscles are just super used to the firing pattern of pedaling a bike, whereas I think that might take less experienced racers, more time to develop, and maybe you need to do some targeting work in that regard.
The Preseason, I'll give cadence-specific work to riders. And it's not necessarily to improve a certain aspect of fitness. It's more to improve neuromuscular coordination, just learning how to contract your muscles really quickly. I think it's really important and something that is not going to be inherent necessarily, something that has to be worked on. And so I don't necessarily do a ton of cadence work these days, but I definitely did a lot in the first five.
Five years I was racing, and I think that really benefited me in the early days, and it's led to a nice, supple pedal stroke, and yeah, there's neuromuscular pathways. Once they're there, they come back really quickly if you take some time off. I think it makes a difference with the speed of racing, too, because I know a lot of people who can really only push hard going uphill, and then I also know a lot of people who can really only push hard when they're...
on flat ground. Like one of my earliest clients, I said, go do a one-minute test and pick your favorite steep hill, like most people want to do. And he was like, can I do this on flat ground? My power is actually worse uphill. And I went, oh, that's, I've never heard of this before. You know, years later, now it all makes sense. I think that also has to do with biomechanics of the rider. I think like a long femur rider might.
Be more suited to pushing power up a hill, whereas someone with a longer torso, shorter femur might be more better at pushing power on the flats. That's just a theory of mine. Well, I have no knowledge in this area, so I'm just going to shrug. Yeah, I mean, I think, like, yeah, different people are, I've definitely seen it go both ways. It's more common for people to be able to produce power uphill, but I have seen...
the ability to make power on the flats a little bit easier. Oftentimes, it's really good time trial riders, too. They're like the ones that are good at sustaining power on the flats. All right. I have a really good question for you. So let me paraphrase this. The online watts per kilo chart calculators, do you find that those are accurate and to the level that somebody is racing?
Are you referring to Andy Coggins' chart of like, you must be this power to win? I don't use it, but I think Intervals has the same chart and it'll show you where your watts per kilo is relatively yada yada. Right. I would say those are fairly accurate. I mean, having more watts per kilo is definitely not going to hurt you. I think it's hard to quantify these things because
Bike Racing is not all power to weight. So you can't say for sure if you're pushing five watts per kilo, you're going to be a domestic pro. That's just not realistic. I think it goes back to what we were talking about of having those skill sets where...
You could be an extremely crafty rider, be extremely good at drafting and cornering and positioning, and have great race craft and punch way above your weight as far as watts per kilo. And then vice versa, you could probably be a rider who's got a 6 watt per kilo FTP, and if you are just sitting in the wind the whole race and riding 50th wheel, you're probably not going to do that well.
It's really hard to quantify those things. I know a couple of people like that for sure. And I appreciate when they realize it themselves and they say, oh, you know, if I could stop eating so much wind, I might actually have a really good result one of these days. And then you watch them on TV racing and you're like, yep, yeah, I see that.
Right, yeah, bike racing takes a really high degree of skill, and I think people forget that. And to be a really good bike racer, you have to be exceptionally fit, and you also have to be exceptionally skilled. Yeah. And then the intersection of those two points, you get riders like Robin Carpenter and Sepp Coos and World Tour guys, right? Yeah, for sure. But you have to have both to be successful. Yeah, I've always admired Carpenter's racing too. He's been...
He's not only fit, but he reads the race well. He's got all the skills that you need. Yeah, agreed. Big fan. For... I'm not sure I understand this question. Oh, here's one. What's the future of domestic pro and amateur racing? Do you have any predictions for us? Let me just pull up my crystal ball real quick.
I wish I knew. Okay, how about, where do you see things going right now? Like, so resurgence of the popularity of cycling, hopefully we get a Coos bump over the next couple years, that'll be nice. Right. Yeah, I'm very curious to see if Sepp Coos' FWALTA win will actually have an influence on American cycling or not, because it's not the tour. And I think a lot of people that are already queued into cycling are...
really excited about step winning, but I don't know if it's necessarily going to pull fans in that aren't already in the sport. I think Unchained actually did a lot more for that. So far, because when I was standing roadside at the Pronats crit in Knoxville this year, the couple next to me had driven three, four, five hours to come watch the race because they had just watched Unchained. And they had never seen bike racing before.
and I tried to be as kind and accommodating as I humanly could while also being on the radio, like, move up. I mean, that's what you saw with Drive to Survive, the F1 show. That's why I got it to F1 for sure. Right, yeah, so yeah, like, how many people do you know are into F1 because of that show? So I think, I don't know if Unchained has been receptive quite as well as Drive to Survive, but I think, yeah, similar concept. I'm honestly very optimistic about.
Racing in the US. I don't know if that's my bias showing because I'm still very, very deep in it. But like a lot of the trends I'm seeing, I'm seeing a lot of positive momentum. I think some of the things I look to to reflect that positive momentum is high school mountain biking. High school mountain biking is growing hugely in popularity. So like Nike and similar?
Yeah, exactly. Nike, Durango Devo, Reno Devo, SoCal Cycling League, all these high school mountain bikes. I went to a high school meet this past January, and I think there was 900 kids racing there, right? How many amateur races have you been to this year where there's like 900 people across the field? Probably not zero. Yeah. So that's very encouraging to see, and I think that'll trickle upward to every category, essentially.
Hopefully, not all those kids are going to continue on with the sport, but at a certain point, it's a numbers game, and if you get 900 kids, maybe 10% or more go on to race in college or race in leaps or what have you. Basically, I'm seeing a bottom-up approach to the sport's growth, and I think that's really encouraging. I'm also seeing a lot more female participation in the sport, which has been super encouraging because
You know, the population of the world is more or less 50-50. It's actually like 51-49 in favor of women. Yeah, there's more female than male. So if bridging that gap and building female racing is going to, it's literally attracting a huge portion of the population in the sport, which I think is going to, it's going to contribute not only to female growth of the sport, obviously, but I think it'll contribute to male growth even too. Yeah. Like you just have more people interested.
I'm seeing more racing bounce back. I think promoters are getting excited about putting on races again. We talked about Joe Martin's potential dates, but I also saw on that tentative UCI calendar there's going to be a new UCI one-day race in New York next year. Grand Fondo, New York, doing a one-day UCI. Do you know if it's like a 1.2 or something like that? I think it's a 1.2. It's either 1.2.
Yeah, I'm pretty sure it's a 1.2. They said they want to make it a 1.1 to eventually bring in World Tour Riders, which my opinion on that is I'm maybe not a big fan of that because it's going to push domestic racers out, which there's pros and cons, right? If there's World Tour Riders, people are probably going to want to watch the race more than if there's only domestic riders. But at the same time, give opportunities to domestic riders and figure out a way to
Televise these domestic races and build hype and story around domestic racing. Like people, when they watch racing, racing is racing. They're not going to know the difference between domestic pro teams and world tour teams, as long as the racing is exciting and dynamic and it's fun to watch. And then you can even follow the story around it if you're able to follow teams and riders throughout a year. Yeah, that'd be cool to have the UCI race on Saturday and then amateur races on Sunday on the same course.
Yeah, I think they're planning on doing the same day, even. So the pros leave in the morning, and then 30 minutes later, the Gran Fondo mass participation ride goes. And I've honestly, I've been looking at that same model. I think it's a really good idea, because that's how gravel races operate. I mean, everyone actually just starts together in one big field in gravel races. But you have this really high quality of racing at the front.
and then you have mass participation and riding for the challenge and for fun at the back of the field and then everything in between. So I think it's actually, I think USA Cycling should really adopt this model for most of the racing in the US. You see that model in the European sense where the big races for amateurs over there are Gran Fondos and you can get like, you can get pro contracts by winning Gran Fondos because you're racing against
ex-pros and really talented riders. And that's how marathons are in the US, like the Boston Marathon or the San Diego Rock and Roll Marathon. It's very, very competitive at the front of the field. And then you have 2,000 people that are just trying to finish. It's like you almost have the amateurs propping up the pro race. Yeah. And it's like you also know that you can't compete for the win. And I actually think that the discouragement that happens.
at the amateur level, where, you know, cat four crit, and you're like, okay, everybody, everybody thinks they can win. And then, you know, if you're not doing so well, you get dropped in another road race, et cetera, et cetera, it gets really discouraging. But if the entire goal and focus and who you're competing with shifts towards something that's more like, you're just going to do this, and you get to start with these, you know, top people, I actually think that's really cool.
and there's always someone around to race as you're going too. Right. No, I think that's a great point. Yeah, I see it especially in like hilly road races where first of all, participation has dropped off a lot in those style of races and for good reason too. If you're a cat four and you're not trained full time and you're lining up against someone who trains 15 hours a week and has like the nicest bike and you get
dropped on lap one of five and you're just riding by yourself, that kind of sucks and you're probably not going to want to race again. So I really do think adapting that Gran Fondo model could be somewhat of a saving grace for race participation in the U.S. Yeah. Okay, here's a question for you is, did your training get more simple through the years?
Like, or let's just phrase it this way. How has your training evolved through the years? Like, did you have a bunch of phases of trying this, trying this, trying this? Yeah, I'd say training in general is kind of just a big trial and error experiment to some degree. And the more experience you get, the better at educated guesses you get. My training, for sure, it evolves. And if it's not evolving, you're probably not going to get any faster. You're like, you're a different athlete.
Not only year to year, but day to day, I would say. I think, do you know that one meme where it's like, it's like a U-shaped curve, or it's like the- The bell curve. The bell curve where it's like the genius on one side and the idiot on the other side. It's like- And then they're in the middle. Right. I think everyone, it might even be just like the progression of the athlete's journey, but you start on that.
The left side of the belk-shaped curve, and you finish on the right. We hope. And it's kind of, yeah, yeah, you hope. Well, if you haven't arrived there, you're probably still on your journey. But that's probably holds true for me, I would say, where, you know, when I first started riding, I'm using a heart rate monitor, I'm using RPE, and intervals are three minutes on, three minutes off, go as hard as you can for three minutes.
Go ride your bike as much as you can. Things like that. And then maybe in the middle somewhere, I got lost in the numbers. I need to be doing 207 watts for two hours and 45 minutes to get these adaptations I'm looking for. I need to be hitting 333 watts for my 20-minute FTP interval. I'm trying to be very precise about everything. And then I've kind of broken that mold and reverted back to a simpler thought process where
And you often give this advice where it's just go ride your bike, eat some snacks. Yeah, for sure. Stop thinking about it so much. Train your physiology, not the power numbers. I think that holds real true. And it's just more enjoyable. You need to be enjoying the process and the things you're working towards for it to be sustainable. And if it's not, it's not going to be sustainable. And if it's not sustainable, it's not going to be consistent. And you're probably never going to get to...
your genetic peak. Yeah, that consistency, so, so underrated. Speaking of all of this, actually, here's another question. Do you have any training regrets, and what did you waste time on, and what advice would you give your younger self? I mean, I think we already talked about a lot of those training regrets, just trying to... I don't think you said the word regret yet, so like, what do you look back on and you cringe at it?
They're not necessarily regrets. They're just learning experiences. And mistakes are the greatest teacher. So in a sense, I probably would have had to make those mistakes to get to where I am today. So in a sense, like I really don't have regrets in that regard. I think, you know, if people would have maybe explained things in a different light earlier on, I could have avoided these mistakes. Maybe not. I think...
The things we talked about, where it's like under-fueling, endurance rides, because I would always fuel pretty well for the intensity days and the interval sessions, but I think really stepping up the game on the endurance rides is super beneficial. I think, like we talked about, simplifying the training, where I'm not as focused on the numbers, I'm more focused on the RPE and sensations and the fatigue I'm carrying and just more general sensations.
I think the more I race and train, the more I think about how I can be the best at implementing the fundamentals. I think going back to that bell-shaped curve is like you learn the fundamentals in the beginning or you should learn the fundamentals. And then once you master the fundamentals, quote unquote master, you move on to the complexity of training. And then I think I've kind of reverted back to just trying to be really good at the fundamentals again.
Where I'm trying to recover as best as I can from each session. I'm trying to just get volume on the bike. I'm trying to get high quality intensity on the bike. I'm trying to sleep as well as I can. I'm trying to eliminate a lot of life stressors off the bike. Basically, just keeping myself a healthy human is really beneficial for being a good cyclist.
I agree. Actually, one of the things that I usually tell people when they ask about  when they ask me to do something that's complicated and very individual, like a taper or openers or warm-up or a lot of stuff. And I tell them, try this or try this, but the worst mistake you can do is not learning from it.
Right. And I think that that's probably the biggest thing here is because I think too many people think they have to get it right the first time. And if you realize that you are going to fuck it up and you will have another chance to do this again, taking that approach is probably going to help a lot of people in a lot of ways in terms of figuring out what works best for you personally. Exactly. Yeah.
I mean, I'm still learning, and I've been doing this a long time. And like I said, yeah, mistakes are the greatest teacher, and warm-ups and tapers are so individualized. Half the time, I'm pretty upfront with athletes I coach, where ideally you have some C-priority races, and you're like, okay, we're just going to experiment. And this is a warm-up that might work for you, it might not. Try it out, see how it goes, and if it doesn't work, we'll try something else the next time.
You figure these things out before you're at your A priority race. But I think it's really good to have those situations where you can actually take the pressure off yourself for peak performance. Like you don't need to be peaking for your C race. You need to be learning and making mistakes. So you're capable of having a peak performance at your A race of the year, right? That's the whole point of doing C races. Yeah, and that's one of the things that I think is really valuable about doing more than one event.
Coaching and Consulting with the people who pretty much only do one or two events all year. And I tell them, try to do more so you can learn more, so you can practice, so you can get that feedback loop of what works for you, and maybe this was different this time, and so what worked before didn't this time, and you know how to weigh the new factors affecting how you went. Coaching someone for a single event is so hard. It's nerve-wracking, isn't it? And it's like, okay, you're in the form of your life, but
You got a flat tire in the first five miles and now your race is over. Sorry, you got to wait for next year before you get another chance. So it's very difficult in bike racing where a lot of times things happen that are out of your control. And yeah, it's good to have second chances. Yeah, I agree. Here's a good question. What does your off-season look like?
Well, I usually just record podcasts. It looks different every year. I think it looks different based on how many race days I've had. It looks different on how my motivations are looking. It looks different based on what the racing timeline for next year is going to be. If I was going to start racing in January next year, my off-season would look very different. Yeah, it would be like three days long.
Yeah, exactly. Or if I, you know, maybe I only did 10 race days instead of 50 or whatever, I would maybe take a week off and then maybe start building back up a little bit. But since I took quite a big season, I'll probably take close to three weeks off the bike or so, and I'll feel it out in that time frame. I think people really need to lean on their motivation levels at this time of year. I think a good starting point is taking two weeks off of riding.
either completely off the bike or unstructured riding. You're riding for exercise, not for training. That's a new one, yeah. Yeah, because there's a difference, right? Training is just structured, purposeful exercise. You don't need to do that right now. So get through those two weeks and reevaluate and think about your motivation levels. I find motivation levels are highly correlated to fatigue levels. If you're highly motivated or ready to start training again, you're probably...
Feeling Pretty Fresh Physically. So I think those are good keys to lean into. If you're not motivated to get back on the bike, take another week off and then reassess after that. I think cross-training is really important, especially if you're a full-time racer. If you've done 50-plus race days and you've trained from March to September and all you've done is on the bike training, your body's going to be messed up.
There's no way around it. You're going to have imbalances. Your iliose is going to be super tight. Your hip flexor, your muscles probably have some lower back pain. You might have some nagging knee issues. You might not even be able to tell because you're so chronically crunched up in spinal flexion, hip flexion. So in the off-season, I try to spend a month undoing some of the damage of the previous race season, but also building some resilience for the next year's race season.
You know, and I do that in the form of cross-training activities that appeal to me and are fun to me, because why wouldn't I? So last year, I was actually surfing a lot, and I found, like, surfing is a really good counterbalance to cycling, because cycling is very, it's a lot of spinal flexion, it's a lot of hip flexion, whereas surfing is a lot of spinal extension. You're using, you're engaging different muscles, but it's also good.
Low Intensity Cardio, and it's really fun. So I was doing a lot of that to balance cycling up. This year, I'm looking at a couple backpacking trips. I'm going to do a little bit more hiking than normal. I think hiking is super beneficial because you're moving in various planes of motion. You're actually experiencing impact and bone loading. Exactly. Bone loading. I went on a hike on Sunday. I did eight and a half miles. How sore were you the next day?
The next, I'm still sore. It's been five days. I am still sore. Like, I cannot walk downstairs. I couldn't sit down on the toilet. The back of my calves are still pretty tight. And so I did that, and that was a cue to be like, wow, I should probably do more of this. And maybe start slower.
Yeah, exactly. Yeah, you don't realize how much muscle damage those eccentric contractions do to you. Oh, I do, but most people forget until they go do it. Yeah, it's like being back in the gym for the first day. And you're so ironically fit, you could just go forever, and then the next day your muscles are like, oh, you fucked around, now you're going to find out. Yeah, the doms really sneaks up on you for sure. Yeah, but yeah, I mean, I try to, there's an expression I really enjoy where it goes.
You're a human first, an athlete second, and a cyclist third. And so in the season, I'm a cyclist. I'm focused on performance. I'm focused on doing well in races. In the off-season, I'm a human and I'm an athlete. I'm trying to get back to the fundamentals. I'm trying to ground myself. I'm trying to do other activities. I'm trying to build resilience. And I have a pretty good track record of not injuring myself throughout the year. And a lot of that I attribute to.
Cross-Training the Off-Season, Gym Work in the Off-Season, even if you're not building... Disc breaks. Yeah. Well, I'm talking more like chronic overuse injury, right? Like, I don't get knee problems. I attribute a lot of that to, like, working on stabilizing muscles and doing gym work and doing load-bearing activities. So you're doing these things that...
maybe aren't directly impacting your cycling performance, but they definitely have an indirect performance implication. Yeah. Okay. Here's a good question, which is maybe you can answer the  well, I could answer this, you could answer this, but I think a lot of people don't realize how  well, let me ask a question so I don't  people don't think I'm putting words, ideas in your head. How much volume are Cat1 racers actually averaging?
I'd say 15 hours a week is a good proxy, but that is a pretty loaded question, right? I think you could see 8 hours to 30 hours. Yeah, so 15 is like your average. Exactly, yeah. I'd say 15, for an average cat 1, 15 would be a pretty good proxy of what the bare minimum might be to...
Be able to participate in those races. So what about when you get up to the domestic pro level and you've got some long stage races and you've got a lot of race days? Yeah, that number definitely gets bumped up to 20 plus, I'd say. Maybe even more, occasional 30 hour week. It depends on your lifestyle and your financial situation, how much time you have to train, obviously. I think when it comes to volume and race performance.
More is not always better, but in most cases, more volume is probably going to be better. So if you have the time and the means and you can ride 25 hours instead of 20 hours, you're probably going to see a performance bump in doing that. One person wants to know your opinion on the NCL. I will not ask it the way it was asked, but what is your opinion on the NCL races? Did you actually do any this year? I don't remember. No, we weren't an NCL team.
or we didn't get paired with the team doing the NCL because it was men's and women's team. So more often than not, you had to have a men's and women's team or you had to join up with a program that had that or whatever. Yeah, we didn't end up doing any of the NCLs. I'd say opinion is pretty mixed. I think there's...
There's pros and cons, just like with just about everything else. I think the MCL did a really good job of providing livable wages to riders. So you had riders making, I heard the minimum salary was like 25k and some riders were getting paid. It won't be next year. Yeah, I know it's lower next year, which is, it probably should have been lower this year, just from a sustainability standpoint. Like some riders were getting paid upwards of six figures, which is
Maybe not sustainable if the series is only three races long. I see why they did it, though. They needed to get people on the teams and get people in the races. I actually thought the races were fun to watch. I thought the races were fun to watch, and what the NCL did was bring in a lot of talent into domestic racing. It was apart from the NCL itself, right? You had the Denver Disruptors and the Miami Knights, and both of these teams were stacked, and they had high-level riders.
ex-World Tour riders, aspiring World Tour riders, and these teams both did domestic racing apart from the NCL. They did Redlands, they did Joe Martin, they did a lot of bigger crits. And so just in that regard, you're having this influx of high-talented riders coming in and doing these domestic races, and it's essentially elevating the competition for everyone. So from that standpoint, I think the NCL is...
That was a good thing for the MCL to do that. It was pretty beneficial for domestic racing as a whole. Where I see potential flaws in the MCL is maybe not paying the riders as much as promised, or lack of race schedule, or lack of opportunities for racers. Maybe not having as good of media coverage as...
was promised, or being able to pull more viewership into the sport. I mean, cycling media coverage is just shit in general. I mean, that's one of the easiest things about getting into F1. You go to the F1 page and you're like, it's 80 bucks a year and I get to watch 20 plus races. I get to see literally everything from every angle. Like you can get like in-car telemetry and like camera angles and everything. And it's all in one spot. And in cycling, I've got to pay Flow. I've got to pay Peacock. I've got to pay
et cetera, et cetera. Just put it in one spot. I understand why it's not, but it's still annoying. It's kind of this catch-22 of you need a really big influx of money in the sport to, like media coverage is shit because there's no money in it and there's no money in it because there's no viewership in it and there's no viewership in it because there's no money in it to have high production quality. So it's just like negative feedback loop in a way where to make US race coverage
Palatable, you probably would need a big money sponsor to come in and say, okay, we're going to throw in $20 million to make really high quality media coverage and content around bike racing. Because it's doable. You could have really, really good race coverage in the US, especially crit racing. You could put multiple moto cameras in the field and have multiple angles in that way. You could have drone footage going on. Yeah, a lot of corner cameras.
Right. For sure. I completely agree. Like, bike racing is very exciting, but it doesn't really seem that way on TV. It's really hard to show the speed. It's hard to show what's going on in the middle of the field. I think you slap a GoPro on one member of every team. You get some drones. You get some motorbike cameras. You get high-quality announcers. You get really good production value.
And obviously this costs a lot of money, which is not there. But if you can do all those things, I think people would want to watch cycling. And I think that is what would grow the sport quite a bit. And yeah, there's definitely a big gap in that regard right now. All right, here's a question. I like this one because not necessarily for the question itself, but because it will lead us into something else. So how do you quote unquote manage and evaluate?
I start by looking at potential pinch points. And pinch points could be coming out of the base of a climb, could be tight corners, anywhere that's going to put the peloton under distress. I start to think about a race like that, first of all. Like, okay, these are going to be crucial moments. You're either going to find splits or breakaways are going to happen in these parts.
Like, playmakers are going to do things during these moments of the race. So thinking about the race course in that regard is really important. I think about the history of the race as well. The last five editions of the race, how did they play out? Was it a breakaway? Was it a sprint? I think about the weather, how that's going to affect the course itself. So there's all these factors that contribute. And then you think about...
the racers themselves, like what personnel are available on your own team, what racers you're racing against, what are their strengths and weaknesses. So it's really this conglomeration of all these factors that you have to think about in a conscious, specific way to really formulate a plan that may or may not work. And oftentimes, you know, the plan you make on paper is probably not going to work. It's better, in my experience, to have riders
Set different roles for themselves, rather than specific plans. And then, so you set these roles for riders, you ride together so you can communicate mid-race, because more often than not, you're going to have to adapt the plan. And then, you can think about racing, racing on a course from a positioning standpoint. You know, if you're 20 wheels towards the front, you're in play, and if you're 20 wheels, if you're further back than that, you're out of play. So there's moments of the race where it's beneficial to be, quote-unquote,
in play where you can actually affect the race. And there's moments where it's beneficial to be out of play because maybe you're conserving energy waiting for those crucial moments. That's kind of where I thought you would go with that is adding in the human element and not just thinking about does the road go up or down or does it go left and right and get narrow and wide. And so I guess the follow-up to this would be, and this is me talking,
What's the balance between racing the course and racing the people? I'd say ultimately the people are going to make the race, not the course, because you could have the hilliest course possible, and if everyone's racing really conservative and defensively, it might not be that. You're still going to have a bunch spread at the end of this long hilly race. Right, and vice versa.
You'd have a pan flat race, and if people are just attacking nonstop, it could actually be a very aggressive, hard race. So I tend to think about the racers more than the course. I think about how the racers can use the course to have a positive or negative impact on the race. And that's probably a better way to think about it. Like if there's a big hill or a big pinch point, what can I do as a racer to put pressure on everyone else coming into this pinch point?
So you're using the hill as like a springboard, but it's not, I think at that, at a higher level, it's not, like the fitness levels are more on par with one another, so racing the racers is much more a part of the equation than simply looking at the course and saying, okay, I gotta go over these like couple four-minute hills and this S-turn or whatever. Alright, we've got two questions left. Second to last is,
What's the biggest training myth that you had to unlearn? Now, we kind of touched on this already, but what's something that sticks out in your head as an axiom or an adage or a rule of thumb where, as you got later into racing, you went, oh, that's bullshit? Yeah, I mean, I would say the biggest one was just intensity of endurance rides.
thinking that I needed to go out and ride 70% of FTP to make this an impactful ride. Otherwise, I'm not riding hard enough to see those adaptations. I think that's a big myth that still is very relevant today and I think will continue to be relevant. There's this misconception that the harder you work, the more adaptations you're getting or whatever, no pain, no gain mentality, which has a lot of negative.
Impact on training usually. Yeah, it's better to maybe train smarter, not harder. Other myths, I think, I don't know if I've necessarily bought into many other myths. I think I'm usually pretty good at thinking critically about these kind of things. You never had an early coach who told you things and you were like, oh yeah, I guess so. And then later you went, oh, that's weird. Because I've still got a couple of those things in my head.
about one coach who told me, if you want a 400-watt FTP, just do FTP work for a year, and it'll be there, but you just don't do that because you need to train other things to race. Yeah, I mean, you probably should have just taken a year off racing and 400-watt FTP. I'd say just a lot of mysticism around
FTP, what FTP really means. Mysticism. I love that. Yeah, like this, yeah, very, there's a lot of, there's a lot of thoughts about FTP that are probably not accurate and it might not even matter necessarily too much. Do you mean, you mean in pop culture or like in the academic sense of like critical power versus FTP type stuff? I think more to so in pop culture, it's like, okay, people are still.
Under the impression that FUP is this number that you can hold for an hour, or it's this, it's 95% of your 20 minute power, all these, all these things, I think those are like a lot of the prevailing myths I think of. And it comes back to, again, it's like, these things are very individualized, and there's no, there's no magic, like, there's nothing magical about what power you can do for an hour, like, your body doesn't know necessarily, like, what an hour. Yeah, your body doesn't have exactly an hour, like, stopwatch.
Yeah, it's not like you can hold 300 watts for an hour, and then once you get to an hour and one second, the power turns into a pumpkin. Right. I think, yeah, and I think the way people think about FTP intervals and potentially executing those can be really challenging. That is something I can draw back onto my early days of training, where when I would do FTP intervals, I would usually go off of my 20-minute power.
So I would do my first interval. Say I'm doing a 2x20, I would do my first interval pretty close to my best 20-minute power. And then my second 20-minute interval, I'd be like, high-tempo, low-sleep squat. And I'm like, oh, this is FTP training, great. Just hanging on. All right, last question. How did he get his hair so curly?
The trick is, I never wash my hair. That's kind of gross. Just let the ocean salt water make the curls. Yeah, just wet it down. Yeah. Do you have anything else? Any kind of closing thoughts? Did anything pop up where you thought, oh, we got to touch on that and we didn't quite get to it?
I don't think so. There was a couple questions I was going to ask you. Just some things we've talked about from kind of like the last consultation we had that people might be curious about. Oh, by all means. Yeah, so I remember that conversation. It kind of went like, hey, Collie, what do I need to do to continue to get faster? And you kind of gave me some answers that I wasn't particularly thrilled about at the time. You're like, well...
You're probably going to need to ride, you know, 30 hours a week, or at least a lot more than you've been riding, because I don't think you necessarily need to go from 15 hours to 30 hours, right? Yeah, that's a big job. You just need to do more than you've done previously, I think, is a good way to put it. So that was advice piece number one. And the other thing was, you should probably do some rides that are eight hours in length or longer.
I remember hearing. So my question to you was, maybe you can extrapolate a little bit more on those two answers, or expand a little bit more. Like, why would you say eight-hour rides are more beneficial than just, why is that better than a six-hour ride, or doing multiple six-hour rides?
So, in my experience, one of the things that I've seen in the last couple years that makes a huge difference to somebody's endurance, I would say, if we're going to make a hierarchy, up at the top of the pyramid, or maybe at the base of the pyramid, the most important thing, hierarchy, pyramid, those are very opposite things. Okay, bottom of the pyramid is the most important, top of the hierarchy is the most important. All right, scratch that. So, the most important thing.
I'm going to stop analogies right now. I got a flu shot and a COVID booster yesterday, and I just stopped feeling like death like an hour before we hit record. Perfect. So like the hierarchy of needs. I said I was not going to do analogies. So the most important thing is total ride volume. And it doesn't seem to matter exactly where it comes in. As long as you get enough rest, it's really good.
So one of the consequences of that is when you're trying to do more, I don't want anybody cutting into their recovery days. And so if your typical long ride is five or six hours, I see people getting a lot of benefits by going up to seven or even eight. And so if your long ride is like three, I would say try to do four to five.
And even if that means cutting into another ride, especially if your events are longer, and your events are quite long, especially if you're doing some gravel races, some of the stages on the stage races are quite long. So that's one of the reasons that I gave you those recommendations as things to target to progressively overload your endurance. So are you alluding to if you're doing an eight-hour ride?
On a subsequent day, you might only do two hours or a shorter session, and that's going to aid in your recovery instead of doing, say for instance, you're trying to get 16 hours, you could do two eight-hour rides and just recover the rest of the time, or you could do four four-hour rides, and so theoretically, you're only recovering three days. Is that kind of what you're alluding to?
with getting more volume in a single day versus bringing it out. Okay, that is a logical extreme version of this where I would say now we've gotten to the silly side of the recommendation. Right. And that's one of the things is I was making those recommendations for you and not like for a general person's, but you make a good point because if somebody, let's say, let's say their longest event is a criterium.
Then I would definitely say it doesn't matter the length of your longest ride. It's way less important, but if you're doing a five, six-hour stage race, it starts to matter a great deal. Right. Do you think there is an upper limit to length of your riding that you should stick to? Because honestly, I've been thinking about 30-hour weeks a lot, and part of my brain comes back to this point of,
How should I be breaking up a 30-hour week? Should I do three 10-hour days and just chill the rest of the time? Or should I do six 5-hour days? Is there really a difference? Is one more beneficial than the other? Yeah, for sure. I appreciate the way that you are asking this, too. Because a lot of the time, if you're just riding three days in a week and they're all 10-hour days,
I think in some ways you are you're actually cutting some consistency from your riding because now we've got four recovery days in a week and I would I would posit that people could probably train more frequently than that and the frequency of the training seems to and here's the thing it's like you know it's still a week it's a seven-day cycle there's more
You know, the body doesn't recognize a week as much as it doesn't recognize an hour. Right. But I will give you an example from one of my high volume clients from, I'm just going to go back to April, let's say. So, let's see, here is a, that's a 28 hour week, that's a 24, 28, let's see.
Total Duration, Bike Duration. Here's a good one. Previous week, he had done some kind of moderate stuff leading into a stage race. The next week, I gave him a Long Endurance Ride Monday, Recover Ride Tuesday, a long ride, seven hours with race-specific prep intervals on that ride.
a long endurance ride, a double VO2 day, and then recovery on the weekend, because he had stuff planned. And that was a very large week. Yeah, that sounds really hard. Because it was on the back of, you know, kind of, we used the stage race to kind of kick off a training block. And then...
After that, there was some ups and downs, some ups and downs. And yeah, like about three, four weeks after that, he had one of his goal races for the season. And he did phenomenally well. Was on the podium, actually. And his first UCI points. Congrats to him. Nice. But that's one of the ways to break that out, is to think about having
like, cause the longer days also necessitate more recovery. So I usually think about three recovery type days and you don't have to be off the bike. He really likes to ride. So he typically will go spin very easy for those days. And then he's got five days and I'll try to make four of them pretty long and one of them kind of moderate. And that's not a bad way to structure that type of thing. Yeah. I think you have to also be thinking about it in terms of like,
Just a little bit more logically of how you're going to structure your day, too. I found that when I did that 10-hour ride on my bikepacking trip, I'm finishing the ride at 7pm, and I'm eating dinner, and then it's pretty hard to go to bed after you've been riding your bike for 10 hours. So you probably have to factor in a little bit of those things where you might want to give yourself a little bit of buffer time between finishing the ride and
and having to wind down and recovery and eating some food and having digestion and getting a good night's sleep. And those things might not be possible if you're just, you're riding 12 hours sunrise to sunset. Yeah. And I would say that the typical long ride I give people is like six to seven. And normally I usually don't, I'll do eight in the summer sometimes where I'll say you can go longer. This guy certainly will go longer if I, even if I don't ask him to.
And you're right about that because the logistics of it and the bike life balance of it and how it affects your sleep and all that stuff has a huge impact too. Yeah. Yeah. I would say a general rule of thumb is your training day shouldn't be longer than the average work day. Like if you're clocking in at 8.30 a.m. and riding until 6 p.m.
You might be overdoing it a little bit. Megan made that joke on the last podcast. She said that she prefers seven-hour rides to eight because eight is like a nine-to-five job. That's way less fun. Yeah, exactly. I would totally agree with that. Or you're on the bike for eight hours, but an hour of that, you're taking your lunch break. I highly recommend a lunch break on a long ride, for sure. Right. Did I answer your question? I'm not... I think so, yeah. I mean...
My question didn't really have an answer to it. It was more just devil's advocate, food for thought on these long rides and potentially how someone could try to structure something as daunting as a 30-hour week. Yeah. For most people, I've heard some feedback on this where they bristle a little bit at us throwing around 30-hour weeks as if average folks could accomplish them.
They're valuable to consider as an extreme example for just exactly what you're saying, because when we consider that, you know, can I do three 10-hour rides in a week? Is that okay? The number of people who ask me in the weekend Instagram Q&A, is it better to do two 2-hour rides or one 4-hour ride over the weekend? It's like, should I take Saturday off and ride 4 hours on Sunday, or should I do...
I always tell them, whatever's less stressful. Yeah. Time is time, right? Because the stress has an outsized influence on your fitness, rather than how you break out your four hours. Right. Yeah, I would agree with that. And yeah, 30 hours is, it is a long time to be riding your bike. But I will say, I did a 31-hour week.
Last Week, and I wasn't cracked by any means at the end of the week. But I think going back to that, I was feeling well and riding really easy. And a 30-hour week is a very long week, but it should not be a very hard week, if that makes sense. The difficulty comes from the length, not the intensity. And I've had clients who go out and do a training camp, and I'll guide them through the training camp for intensity and how to structure the week and days and stuff like that.
and one of my clients this year had gone and done a training camp and he had done a 20, 25 hour week, which is a lot for him. It's a lot for most people and he came back and he said, I actually feel great. I don't feel wrecked and we got to build a lot of fitness on top of that trip as opposed to slogging through your last ride.
and then getting home and going, wow, I really need a rest week. You can get right back to training. Right. Well, it sounds like that rider has a lot of restraint because most often than not, when riders do training camp weeks, they will ride heavy volume, but also a lot of intensity as well. So what I see on average, training someone, they go to a training camp, they might do a 20 to 25 hour week.
Intensity almost every single day as well. And so you finish the week just completely demolished. So by that train of thought, you're like, wow, 25 hours is really hard. But it probably, the intensity is probably impacting that train of thought more so than the actual volume of writing. Yeah, completely. Absolutely. Oh, so was there anything else? Because that's all I got.
No, I think that answered all my questions. I hope I answered a lot of the questions. I had a great time. I think you did a great job answering them, and I thank you for coming on. Yeah, thanks for having me. Yeah, this was kind of like a two-year reunion from last time I was on the podcast. That's true, yeah, you and Alex. And I was not so good at interviewing people back then, so I apologize if that podcast was a little...
Uninteresting to listen to, because you're a very interesting guy to talk to, and I actually feel like I didn't quite do you and Alex justice that day, because I remember as soon as we hit stop on the recording, you guys started talking, and I went, oh, there's the podcast I wanted, because you were just exchanging stories about the race season. I was like, oh man, how come I couldn't facilitate that? Yeah, so what you have to do is say, okay, I'm stopping now, but then don't actually hit the...
The stop button and just let the conversation keep rolling and probably get some good nuggets out of that. Oh, God. If I were smarter, I would have done that. I used to do that when I was a recording engineer. I would record like way longer than people thought I was recording. And then occasionally they would go, oh, man, I wish I remembered what I did. And I would go, oh, just listen back to this. I got it. Which when you're in a recording studio was not creepy. Any other time, it's very creepy to do that. I can see why.
All right, man. Thanks for coming on. Appreciate it. Yeah, thanks for having me, Coley. Always a pleasure. Yeah, I love nerding out about this kind of stuff. I think about training probably more than anything else. Same here. It's our full-time. Great to have these conversations. I also appreciate talking to somebody who's also coaching as well as doing the full-time riding thing because there's a lot of folks in between and I really appreciate your perspective on being on both sides of the fence there.
Yeah, I think the experience is just as valid as knowing the physiology. I would say more valid in a lot of ways. Like it's all got to have a confluence. And if you think the science stuff is going to make you faster, well, you better see that you're getting faster. Otherwise, you're just, well, you're not wasting your time, but you should be learning something. Yeah, I think it's so hard to like rely on the science too. There's so much noise out there. And it's like, I'll see.
This might be a tangent, but I'll see these studies where it's like, you know, 30 on, 30 off intervals. In three weeks, you're going to get fitter than 4x4 VO2s. And I'm like, I'm looking at this, I'm like, what about after three weeks? So it's just like, there's so much noise out there that it can be really hard to figure this kind of stuff out. And I think people need mentors like yourself.
to guide them through these things. Wow, that's really flattering. Thank you so much. All right, so I want to thank everybody for listening again, as usual, and also Taylor for coming out to the podcast, and you can obviously see why we kept going for a couple hours after the podcast. We were obviously not done. I kind of wish I had recorded it.
Oh well, so be it. No problem. We'll just have him back on again in a little while. So thanks everybody for listening. If you want to reach out to Taylor, I will have his contact info up on the website at empiricalcycling.com. If you want to reach out to him and say hi and say thanks or whatever, please do. If you want to reach out to me at empiricalcycling at gmail.com, please reach out. If you are thinking about coaching, now is a really good time. Turn of the season. If you want to think about a consultation, want to review your season or kind of go over what you're planning on for next year or
event-specific stuff, strength training, mid-season break, anything like that, our time's your time, if you're a coach, if you're an athlete, if you're just a casual listener, I'm really happy to do all of that kind of stuff, and so please reach out to me again, empiricalcycling at gmail.com, and on the Instagram, Weekend AMAs, up in Empirical Cycling, and that's where we ask the listener questions, so if you want to go ask a question, go follow me there, and I guess that's it.